Cache Mapping-
 

Cache mapping defines how a block from the main memory is mapped to the cache memory in case of a cache miss.
OR

Cache mapping is a technique by which the contents of main memory are brought into the cache memory.
 

The following diagram illustrates the mapping process-

 



 

Now, before proceeding further, it is important to note the following points-

 

NOTES
 

Main memory is divided into equal size partitions called as blocks or frames.
Cache memory is divided into partitions having same size as that of blocks called as lines.
During cache mapping, block of main memory is simply copied to the cache and the block is not actually brought from the main memory.
 

Cache Mapping Techniques-
 

Cache mapping is performed using following three different techniques-


 
 



 

Direct Mapping
Fully Associative Mapping
K-way Set Associative Mapping
 

1. Direct Mapping-
 

In direct mapping,

A particular block of main memory can map only to a particular line of the cache.
The line number of cache to which a particular block can map is given by-
 

Cache line number
= ( Main Memory Block Address ) Modulo (Number of lines in Cache)

 

Example-
 

Consider cache memory is divided into ‘n’ number of lines.
Then, block ‘j’ of main memory can map to line number (j mod n) only of the cache.
 



 

Need of Replacement Algorithm-
 

In direct mapping,

There is no need of any replacement algorithm.
This is because a main memory block can map only to a particular line of the cache.
Thus, the new incoming block will always replace the existing block (if any) in that particular line.
 

Division of Physical Address-
 

In direct mapping, the physical address is divided as-

 



 

2. Fully Associative Mapping-
 

In fully associative mapping,

A block of main memory can map to any line of the cache that is freely available at that moment.
This makes fully associative mapping more flexible than direct mapping.
 

Example-
 

Consider the following scenario-

 



 

Here,

All the lines of cache are freely available.
Thus, any block of main memory can map to any line of the cache.
Had all the cache lines been occupied, then one of the existing blocks will have to be replaced.
 

Need of Replacement Algorithm-
 

In fully associative mapping,

A replacement algorithm is required.
Replacement algorithm suggests the block to be replaced if all the cache lines are occupied.
Thus, replacement algorithm like FCFS Algorithm, LRU Algorithm etc is employed.
 

Division of Physical Address-
 

In fully associative mapping, the physical address is divided as-

 



 

3. K-way Set Associative Mapping-
 

In k-way set associative mapping,

Cache lines are grouped into sets where each set contains k number of lines.
A particular block of main memory can map to only one particular set of the cache.
However, within that set, the memory block can map any cache line that is freely available.
The set of the cache to which a particular block of the main memory can map is given by-
 

Cache set number
= ( Main Memory Block Address ) Modulo (Number of sets in Cache)

 

Also Read- Set Associative Mapping | Implementation and Formulas

 

Example-
 


 
Consider the following example of 2-way set associative mapping-

 



 

Here,

k = 2 suggests that each set contains two cache lines.
Since cache contains 6 lines, so number of sets in the cache = 6 / 2 = 3 sets.
Block ‘j’ of main memory can map to set number (j mod 3) only of the cache.
Within that set, block ‘j’ can map to any cache line that is freely available at that moment.
If all the cache lines are occupied, then one of the existing blocks will have to be replaced.
 

Need of Replacement Algorithm-
 

Set associative mapping is a combination of direct mapping and fully associative mapping.
It uses fully associative mapping within each set.
Thus, set associative mapping requires a replacement algorithm.
 

Division of Physical Address-
 

In set associative mapping, the physical address is divided as-

 



 

Special Cases-
 

If k = 1, then k-way set associative mapping becomes direct mapping i.e.
 

1-way Set Associative Mapping ≡ Direct Mapping
 

If k = Total number of lines in the cache, then k-way set associative mapping becomes fully associative mapping.
 
